Custom components blog (#615)
reflex-dev/reflex-web: blog/2024-04-16-custom-components.md

---
author: Nikhil Rao
date: 2024-04-16
title: Custom Components
description: Announcing our third party custom component ecosystem.
image: /blog/python.png
---

```python exec
from pcweb.pages.docs import wrapping_react, custom_components, styling, events, tutorial
from pcweb.pages.docs.custom_components import custom_components as cc
```

We are excited to announce the launch of our [custom component ecosystem]({cc.path})! 
 
Custom components allow developers to build their own components and share them with the Reflex community. This includes wrapping React components, as well as creating higher level Reflex components.

### New Features:

> * A `reflex components` subcommand that allows you to create, test, and publish custom components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A `reflex component` subcommand that allows you to create, test, and publish custom components.
```

* A new `rx.ComponentState` class that allows you to encapsulate state and UI for a component in a single class.

## What are Custom Components?

Reflex has many built-in components for common use cases, but sometimes you may want to create your own components. Custom components allow you to encapsulate complex logic and styling into a single reusable component.

For example, in our [tutorial]({tutorial.final_app.path}) we share the code for creating a chat component in Reflex. In order to build a chat app, you would have to copy and paste the code for the chat component into your own app. 

With custom components, we now have a [reflex-chat](https://github.com/picklelo/reflex-chat/) package that you can install with `pip` and use in your app.

```bash
pip install reflex-chat
```

You can then import the chat component into your app and use it like any other Reflex component. All the styling and logic is encapsulated, you only need to pass in the actual LLM logic.

```python exec
import reflex as rx
from openai import OpenAI
from reflex_chat import chat

client = OpenAI()

# Only define your logic, the chat component handles the rest.

> async def process(chat):

Reviewer: shadowing the imported name `chat` makes the code example a little harder to grok.

consider calling this arg something like `chat_state` so distinguish it from the component used in the UI code.

Author: Good call, changed this

    # Start a new session to answer the question.
    session = client.chat.completions.create(
        model="gpt-3.5-turbo",
        messages=chat.get_value(chat.messages),
        stream=True,
    )

    # Stream the results, yielding after every word.
    for item in session:
        if hasattr(item.choices[0].delta, "content"):
            answer_text = item.choices[0].delta.content
            # Ensure answer_text is not None before concatenation
            chat.messages[-1]["content"] += answer_text or ""
            yield
```

```python demo
rx.box(
    chat(process=process),
    height="500px",
    width="100%"
)
```

```md alert info

> # Just define your `process`function to connect the chat component to any LLM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Just define your `process` function to connect the chat component to any LLM.
```

\```python
async def process(chat):
    # Start a new session to answer the question.
    session = client.chat.completions.create(
        model="gpt-3.5-turbo",
        messages=chat.get_value(chat.messages),
        stream=True,
    )

    # Stream the results, yielding after every word.
    for item in session:
        if hasattr(item.choices[0].delta, "content"):
            answer_text = item.choices[0].delta.content
            # Ensure answer_text is not None before concatenation
            chat.messages[-1]["content"] += answer_text or ""
            yield
\```
```

## Types Of Custom Components

There are two categories of custom components: **React wrappers** and **high-level components**.

### React Wrapper

> Reflex is built on top of React, so if we don't have a component you need, you can easily [wrap your own React component]({wrapping_react.overview.path}) and use it in your Reflex app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because Reflex is built on top of React, in most cases you can easily [wrap an existing React component]({wrapping_react.overview.path}) from NPM and use it in your Reflex app.
```

### High-Level Component

> You can also create custom components that don't wrap React, but instead are built on top of existing Reflex components. For example, you could create a custom `Chat` component that encapsulates the logic for a chat app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also create custom components that don't wrap React, but instead are built out of existing Reflex components. For example, you could create a custom `Chat` component that encapsulates the logic for a chat app.
```

> When you run `reflex components init`, you'll get a skeleton project with a `custom_components` folder where you can define your custom component. We generate a scaffold for your component that you can fill in with your own logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you run `reflex component init`, you'll get a skeleton project with a `custom_components` folder where you can define your custom component. We generate a scaffold for your component that you can fill in with your own logic.
```

## Creating Custom Components

> In Reflex 0.4.6 we're introducing a `reflex components` subcommand that allows you to create, test, and publish custom components. See the [Custom Components]({custom_components.overview.path}) docs for full details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Reflex 0.4.6 we're introducing a `reflex component` subcommand that allows you to create, test, and publish custom components. See the [Custom Components]({custom_components.overview.path}) docs for full details.
```

```bash
pip install reflex-chat
```

You can then import the chat component into your app and use it like any other Reflex component. All the styling and logic is encapsulated, you only need to pass in the actual LLM logic.

```python exec
import reflex as rx
from openai import OpenAI
from reflex_chat import chat

try:
    client = OpenAI()
except:
    client = None

# Only define your logic, the chat component handles the rest.
async def run_llm(chat_state):
    # Start a new session to answer the question.
    print(chat_state.messages)
    session = client.chat.completions.create(
        model="gpt-3.5-turbo",
        messages=chat_state.messages,
        stream=True,
    )

    # Stream the results, yielding after every word.
    for item in session:
        if hasattr(item.choices[0].delta, "content"):
            answer_text = item.choices[0].delta.content
            # Ensure answer_text is not None before concatenation
            chat_state.append_to_response(answer_text)
            yield
```

```python demo
rx.box(
    chat(process=run_llm),
    height="500px",
    width="100%"
)
```

```md alert info

> # Just set `process` prop of the chat component to connect to your LLM.

Reviewer: the padding on this box looks a little off; not sure if there's something we can do about that tho

Author: Will look in a follow up

            yield
\```
```

Depending on how much control you want, you can either use a high level component directly or create your own component from scratch.

### Component State

A new feature we've added in 0.4.6 is the `rx.ComponentState` class. This class allows you to encapsulate state and UI for a component in a single class. In fact, this is what allows the `chat` component to work without having the user having to define a state - the component will dynamically create and handle its own state internally.

For example we can create a counter component that increments and decrements a count.

```python demo exec
class Counter(rx.ComponentState):
    count: int = 0

    def increment(self):
        self.count += 1

    def decrement(self):
        self.count -= 1

    @classmethod
    def get_component(cls, **props) -> rx.Component:
        return rx.hstack(
            rx.button("Decrement", on_click=cls.decrement),
            rx.heading(cls.count),
            rx.button("Increment", on_click=cls.increment),
        )

counter = Counter.create
```

Then we can create multiple instances of the counter, each with its own state.

> 

Reviewer: can add this to hack around the counters being tied together when they shouldn't be

    ```python exec
    # Hack because flexdown re-inits modules
    Counter._per_component_state_instance_count = 2
    ```

Then down below the next block

    ```python exec
    # Hack because flexdown re-inits modules
    Counter._per_component_state_instance_count = 5
    ```

Then they will actually operate independently
